Now that university is over and I finally have the energy and time for things other than revision, writing my dissertation, revision, and writing my dissertation, it's time to set my summer goals!

I really, really enjoy setting goals, and I think it's a great way of finding purpose and achieving what I want. I started getting serious about setting concrete, fine-grained goals after reading James Clear's 'Atomic Habits' a couple years ago, and I found that it has improved my life a lot. My thoroughness and strictness with goals isn't a one size fits all situation, but I do think that most people would benefit from knowing more about how to set goals.

To be clear, I know I have way more time and way fewer responsibilities than most people, especially right now. But my issue is that I feel like no one is out there teaching us how to set goals. Most of us are simply told to 'aim high' and 'reach our full potential', without being told how to aim. We end up setting goals that are either wildly unrealistic ('get fluent in German by the end of the year!') or are very vague, not focusing on the process of how to actually do what we want to achieve ('get fit!').

My style of goalsetting is very rigid, because I love making lists, but even if it's not your thing, I still think that seeing how others do things is a great way for figuring out your own unique approach for achieving what you want.

Every year, I make around 10-15 New Year's resolutions. These resolutions are normally academic/learning goals, physical health goals, or mental health goals. This year, some of my academic goals are to graduate with a first class degree and to gain concrete work experience in IT. My mental health goals are to call one long-distance friend a month and to make at least one tangible thing (special food, a painting, a sculpture, a poem) a month. I write down my resolutions and put them on my wall so I can see them at all times.

This is only the foundation. For me, my objectives have to be more specific and detailed for them to be truly achievable, or I won't do any of it. So I make seasonal goals that focus more on processes instead of achievements. I usually make around 10 seasonal goals, with the aim of achieving at least two thirds of them. For instance, one of my winter goals was to spend at least a certain number of hours a week on my dissertation, which contributed to my yearly goal of achieving a first. Another one was to get a gym membership, which was a very non-threatening contribution to my yearly resolution of doing strength training three times a week.

I also make weekly goals! These tend to be more about what I have to do instead of what I aspire to do (e.g. 'do week 3 content for my security engineering module'), but I try to fit in at least one or two things in there that will help me achieve my seasonal goals. Every Sunday, I write down my weekly goals and try to distribute them throughout the week, with specific goals planned for each day.

What works for me doesn't work for everyone. My girlfriend thinks I'm a crazy person for being this specific and fine-grained about things. She acts a lot more based on how things feel for her in the moment, and adjusting routines as necessary. It works great for her, but I could never do it! I'd feel so unmoored! And if she tried to do what I do, she'd probably hate the rigidity. But I think if you are more analytical, enjoy making lists, or evaluate things based on concrete criteria, then this might be a good strategy for you.

Also, even someone as list-crazy as me has to realise when to step back from things. I used to get really upset with myself for not achieving literally every single goal all of the time. I had to realise that there were always going to be things -- whether under my control or completely random -- that would keep me from doing what I wanted to do. That's a big reason why I have so many items on all of my lists! Some years, I might look at my New Year's resolutions at the end of the year and realise that I have only achieved half of what I wanted. Or I finish a week and realise that my list for the coming week is filled with things I wanted to do this week. What I try to tell myself now is that as long as I remain aware of my progress, and I am crossing things off of my list, I am consciously achieving and continuously striving to improve myself. For me, having things to strive for but not achieving them will always be a million times nicer than having nothing to strive for.

This summer, my main themes for goals are to take full advantage of my internship and to spend quality time with my family before I move to Hong Kong. So I will try to think of concrete activities to do with my parents and concrete strategies for improving my technical skills outside of work hours. I am really excited for this summer and can't wait to see how everything goes!