This is a continuation of my writing on HOPE XV. I took a lot of notes during Cory Doctorow's keynote: "Enshittification: Why Everything Suddenly Got Worse and What to Do About It". His talk was pretty incredible, so I am fleshing out these notes here. I talked to Cory after the keynote to get permission to post this--and as a bonus, he signed my HOPE program! :) Everything I've written comes directly from the talk, either paraphrased or a direct quote, and I have marked my own asides with 'author's note'.

[insert autograph photo]

"Enshittification: Why Everything Suddenly Got Worse and What to Do About It"

There is a pandemic infecting companies, and its name is 'enshittification'. This disease consists of four sequential symptoms that transform a company for the worse. It may seem like many platforms have all suddenly declined in quality only recently, but in reality, enshittification has been slowly creeping upon us over the past fifteen years. And it results in platforms being deeply unsatisfactory for all parties, yet somehow not dying. How is this possible? Let us take Meta (Facebook) as an example.

The first three symptoms of enshittification are as follows:
1. The company is good to its end users.
2. The company abuses its end users to be good to its business customers.
3. The company abuses business customers to benefit themselves.

Meta started off as Facebook, a social media service specific to college students. When Facebook decided to open its services to everyone in 2006, it had to compete with other services such as MySpace. Facebook drew users to its service and away from MySpace by promising better privacy and higher quality than MySpace, presenting itself as an underdog against a billionaire-owned competitor.

Once customers were drawn to and 'locked in' to this new service, Facebook began to focus on attracting business customers -- publishers and advertisers -- to its platform. It firstly did so by reneging on its promises of privacy and 'only showing you what you want to see', allowing advertisers to promote their products to specific demographics and cramming unwanted content into users' feeds. At this time, the price of advertising space was also very low. With record numbers of users on the platform and the low cost and perceived high value of advertising, business customers, too, became 'locked in' to Facebook.

To explain the third stage of enshittification, it is first necessary to discuss the concept of <u>algorithmic wage discrimination</u>. This concept can be best exemplified by Uber's payment system for their drivers. Drivers who are more selective with the trips that they accept are paid more per trip; those who accept more trips have their wages randomly and incrementally lowered. Their wages monotonically decrease, thus trapping the most desperate drivers on the platform for the lowest possible wage.

The digital flexibility that Uber has -- the ability to quickly modify their backend -- has proven to be very conducive for enshittification of Uber and other companies, including Meta. Once Facebook's market dominance came to fruition, they started making the same incremental negative changes to their business customers that they had made to their end users. Over time, they jacked up the price of advertising on the platform. When publishers started threatening to leave the platform, Facebook would manipulate their advertising presence, increasing their advertising impressions by the millions, to entice them to stay.

The fourth stage is more concise: <i>panic</i>, or as Meta and other enshittified companies would like you to call it, a 'pivot'. As Facebook received more and more bad press -- from lying to end users and spreading misinformation, from exploiting them for profit (see: Cambridge Analytica), from manipulating their advertisers -- they had to radically switch their image and strategy to distract from the increasingly bad quality of their platform. Their genius idea? Renaming themselves after the metaverse and attempting to sell everyone the idea of hanging out in a primitive, low-poly virtual reality with zero practical purpose. Now <i>all</i> parties, the company, business customers and end users, are unhappy, but all are stuck.

As was previously said, all of these big tech companies have been enshittifying for a while, but the true lack of quality has only come to light recently. This implies that there are exogenous forces causing mass enshittification. More accurately, however, there have historically been forces <i>preventing</i> enshittification that have now slowly dropped away.


[NEXT PAGE]


The first force against enshittification was the presence of competition. Given appropriate competition, companies are incentivised to avoid user abuse and instead give their users the best possible experience. Over the past forty years, though, American companies have been allowed to merge and acquire other companies with minimal interference. So if your competitor is stealing away your user base by giving them a better user experience? If you're Meta, Google or Amazon, your knee-jerk reaction will be to acquire them. And if that smaller competitor refuses to be acquired, the sheer size of these companies allows them to operate the same services far below their cost until their competitor is forced to fold. Society has thus generally accepted the neoliberalist 'consumer welfare theory': if a company was powerful enough to become a monopoly, they weren't considered to be cheating; they were just impressively successful.

The second force was regulation, i.e. the duty of a government to ensure that there is a price for cheating/abuse of anti-trust laws. The issue here actually stems in part from the lack of competition. Hundreds of small- to medium-sized businesses will struggle to find any consensus against regulators, but a few large companies in a sector (or even one particularly large one) can far more easily provide a united front against potential legislation, mobilising consensus and turning it into law. Instead of companies being too big to fail, they are now too big to go to jail.

These two anti-enshittification forces are industry-agnostic, but two more are specific to tech companies: self-help/interoperability and the 'vocational awe' of the tech workforce.

Some might say, 'why wait for regulators? Ad blockers and scripting exist, so de-shittify your web experience by yourself!' This is the core tenet of interoperability: if you don't like a platform, go to another one; if you want to gain the benefits of a platform without the shittiness, you can code that into existence. Unfortunately, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998 prevents exactly that. Through the DCMA, the reverse-engineering of apps to access copyrighted work became a felony. This means that anyone who creates an alternative client for Reddit or Facebook could be imprisoned for up to five years, would no longer be able to vote, and could be fined up to <i>five hundred thousand dollars</i>. That's a very influential reason why companies pressure you so intensely to use their app, and why their web clients tend to be so awful (looking at you, Instagram). Another example of interoperability's slow death is Amazon's acquisition of Audible, which has cornered over 90% of the audiobook market. If you purchase an audiobook off of Audible, it is actually stored in an encrypted form that can only be interpreted by Amazon apps. Good luck trying to 'code quality into existence' when companies do everything they can to prevent you from modifying their set user experience.

The fourth and final force that has historically prevented enshittification was the culture and scarcity of workers in tech. For decades, the demand for tech workers far outpaced the supply, allowing them to hold a lot of power. At the same time, the culture of tech workers has always been heavily steeped in 'vocational awe': a term referring to a person's deep identification of themselves with their work as if it were a sacred calling, even at the cost of their health and wellbeing. While tech workers may be pampered in some ways, working at beautiful offices where you could get a free massage, the culture of prioritising your life outside of work (e.g. by refusing overtime) just wasn't widespread -- especially at startups. Elon Musk calls it 'being extremely hardcore'.

Between having higher-than-average power and being intensely devoted to their work, tech workers experienced profound moral injury from the idea of enshittifying the products that they'd devoted their lives. These engineers would simply refuse to execute any requests to do so, because what would their bosses do-- call their bluff? If they did, the engineers could just start returning all those cold calls from tech recruiters and move to a company where they felt enshittification wasn't creeping in (Author's note: you could argue that companies were overhiring engineers and that there was only a <i>perceived</i> scarcity of skilled tech labour, but the perceived scarcity still affected how companies treated their workers). This changed most obviously in 2021, when mass tech layoffs began. Suddenly workers were perceived as far less valuable, and could no longer be a check on their bosses' worst impulses. Between that and the huge amount of labour that has flooded the sector, engineers have also become far less picky about accepting the work that is available to them.


[NEXT PAGE]


The main point of explaining these forces is to make it clear that executives and management <i>have always wanted</i> to maximise profit for themselves using the lowest-quality product that they could get away with. They didn't use to be better, they simply used to be more constrained by their competition, regulations, the interoperability of the Internet, and their highly powerful and opinionated workforce.

After all this, what is the cure to enshittification? And what's currently being done? The simplest answer is to re-strengthen those enshittification constraints -- and the good news is that re-strengthening work is being done.

There has been more anti-trust action in the last four years than in the previous forty, and a good portion of credit for that goes to Lina Khan, the Commissioner of the US Federal Trade Commission. She has done a considerable amount of work to block monstrous mergers and ban predatory pricing. The business press is vocally against it -- the Rupert Murdoch-owned Wall Street Journal has published a bizarre number of critical op-eds about her -- but in the US and EU, there has truly been a revitalisation of competition law (see: the Digital Markets Act and Digital Services Act). In addition, decentralisation and right-to-repair laws are gaining in popularity. While the Digital Millennium Copyright Act is still alive and well, states like Oregon are passing strong legislation to re-empower consumers (Author's note: one example of this is Oregon's action against 'parts pairing', where devices such as iPhones have some functions automatically disabled if repaired with an unauthorised part).

Another notable area being strengthened is consumer privacy legislation. Enshittification is heavily dependent on aggregating invasive amounts of user data in order to keep the users on the platform and entice business customers (again, see: Cambridge Analytica). Although individual privacy in the US has historically been undermined by the exploitative PATRIOT act, at least significant efforts are being made by American legislators to protect the privacy of users on enshittified platforms. According to Stein's Law, everything that cannot go on forever eventually stops, and enshittification is no exception to this. The fact is, abusing users like this is grossly offensive, and the only people who like it are those who head these monopolies -- legislators and users alike have had enough.

Beyond end users and lawmakers, people in tech are also waking up. No longer do engineers readily believe that they are 'founders-in-waiting': they now know that they, too, are workers. For proof of this, you only need to look at how engineers at<a href="https://www.reuters.com/technology/some-amazon-employees-walk-out-seattle-protest-climate-office-policies-2023-05-31/">the Amazon headquarters in Seattle</a>, not just delivery drivers or warehouse workers, have walked out from their jobs. This specific anti-enshittification force does require more work to regain its previous effectiveness, but it would be blatantly ignorant not to acknowledge how tech workers' perceptions of their companies have changed since the 2021 mass layoffs began.

Ultimately, there is still plenty of work to be done, especially with regards to changing the culture in tech and repealing the over-constrictive measures of the Digital Millennial Copyright Act. Unfortunately, executives will always want to maximise profits at the cost of the wellbeing of their end users, business customers and employees. It's not really accurate to say "if the product you're consuming is free, you're the product", because companies will always make consumers into a product if they can manage it. But through regulation, competition, and the strength of workers, companies can be forced to pretend that they care about you, and we can de-enshittify the Internet. Thank you.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Okay, that concludes my writeup of all my notes from Cory Doctorow's HOPE XV keynote! I know that 2600 Magazine is going to release videos of the talks soon, so when they do, I'll re-watch the talk and make sure all these notes are accurate. I'll edit anything that I feel doesn't accurately represent the keynote. Thanks for reading!