This past weekend I went to HOPE XV, the fifteenth conference and thirtieth anniversary of Hackers on Planet Earth. Famous for past speakers that include Kevin Mitnick, Steve Wozniak, Chelsea Manning and Cory Doctorow, this year's conference was stacked with great talks, workshops and speakers. Since it is organised by 2600 Magazine -- my favourite publication -- and only happens every two years, I had to go! This article focuses on what HOPE stands for, what happens at HOPE, and my personal experience at the conference

"The HOPE/2600 Philosophy"
There are many different schools of thought when it comes to hacking. You have:
- Hackers for fun: i.e. script kiddies who are focused on easy exploits
- Hackers for a political ideology: Nation-state-affiliated hackers who are focused on exploiting vulnerabilities for political gain, Anti-establishment hackers who are focused on disrupting the status quo
- Hackers for profit: who harm systems, steal intellectual property, or sell zero days for profit
- Hackers for research/'safety': Academic ("ethical") hackers who find vulnerabilities for research purposes

What's interesting is that many of these stereotypes (accurate as they are) focus heavily on the end impact of hackers. However, if you read 2600 Magazine, you'll quickly see that many of the articles focus less on the impact of a hack -- in fact, most articles will warn you not to use vulnerabilities for harm or for monetary gain -- and focus more on the _journey_ of the hack. For Hackers on Planet Earth, the goal of a hack is to learn more about a system, whether technical or human, with the ultimate goal of improving it. Don't get me wrong -- many HOPE hackers do hack with a political slant, believing that all information should be free, and there's even an Anarchist Village at most HOPE conferences. Still, I want to make it clear that there's a huge difference between those who hack for disruption or profit, and those who hack to learn and to improve an existing situation even when their idea of improvement goes against the status quo. 

So what separates HOPE from other hacking conferences like DEFCON? I think that many other conferences tend to focus on one of three categories: hacking skills, military, and career. In contrast, HOPE is first and foremost about the hacking mindset and how it can be applied for improving our world.

[HOPE philosophy]

[what was at hope this year? talks]

[what other things happen at HOPE? villages, workshops]

[my personal experience-- what I saw]

[meeting Emmanuel Goldstein and Cory Doctorow]

[the people]

[will I be back for another HOPE?]